---
title: "SCINet Newsletter: December 2025"
description: "SCINet Newsletter for December 2025"

alerts:
  - alert:
    type: info
    slim: true
    text: "Because we could not publish the October 2025 edition of the SCINet Newsletter and we did not want to wait an entire quarter for the next newsletter, we are publishing this interim December 2025 edition. Since the next newsletter would typically be published in January, only a month away, we will skip the January 2026 edition. The SCINet Newsletter will return to its typical quarterly schedule and next be published in April 2026."

sections: 
  - title: Research Spotlight
    fetch: 2025-12-04-juan-gerken
  - title: SCINet and AI-COE Fellows
    text: Fellows
  - title: News
    subsections:
      - Last chance! Apply now to serve as an AI-COE/SCINet Graduate Student Internship mentor in 2026!
      - FY26 SCINet/AI-COE Postdoctoral Fellowships call for proposals
      - FY26 AI Innovation Fund Awards call for proposals
      - More flexible GPU limits
      - "GPU survey: Help guide GPU upgrades in FY2026!"
      - Using Globus to share data with external collaborators
      - Resuming automatic 90-day temporary file deletion
      - DTU Health Tech applications supported on SCINet clusters
  - title: SCINet Working Groups
    text: Working Groups
    subsections:
      - title: SCINet Working Groups
        text: Working groups overview
  - title: Training
    subsections:
      - Training workshops
      - Coursera
      - Workshop Reports
  - title: Support
    subsections:
      - title: SCINet User Tip
        text: "SCINet User Tip: GPU resources available on SCINet"
      - title: SCINet Corner
        text: "SCINet Corner: Overview of SCINet"
  - title: Connect

canonical: /posts/2025-12-04-juan-gerken

fellows:
  - name: Dr. John Konvalina
    img: j-konvalina.png
    bio: "is a SCINet/AI-COE fellow under the mentorship of Dr. Jason Abernathy (USDA-ARS, Auburn, AL). Dr. Konvalina earned his B.S. in Biology and Fisheries & Wildlife at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, his M.S. in Biology at Arkansas State University, and his Ph.D. at the University of Central Florida. His previous research focused on snake reproductive biology, alligator population genomics, and adaptation to salinity in freshwater species. Immediately prior to coming to Auburn, he completed an ORISE USDA-ARS postdoctoral appointment focused on creating a pan-genome annotation for rainbow trout. 

    As a SCINet/AI-COE fellow, Dr. Konvalina will continue to contribute to aquaculture research by using machine learning models to identify the epigenetic factors that impact reproductive success in catfish."
---

## SCINet and AI-COE Fellows

Please welcome our newest SCINet and ARS Artificial Intelligence Center of Excellence (AI-COE) fellow!

{% include fellows %}

## News

### Last chance! Apply Now to Serve as an AI-COE/SCINet Graduate Student Internship Mentor in 2026!

As recently announced through Area offices, we are accepting applications to serve as an ARS AI-COE/SCINet graduate student internship mentor in 2026! These internships allow graduate students with strong data science and computational skills to spend either a summer or a semester working full time with an ARS mentor (or mentors) on an ARS research project. Please note that ARS mentors are not required to have specific data science or computing expertise! Rather, their role is to guide the scientific direction of the project and to contribute the intern’s professional development. 

Each 10-week internship includes a competitive stipend and travel funding for the participant to spend time onsite with their ARS mentor(s). We are working with three partner universities to recruit student participants. We want each of our interns to have an outstanding experience, which means we need outstanding ARS mentors and research projects! 

If you are interested in participating, please visit the [mentor application page](/opportunities/internship-mentors) for more information about how to prepare and submit your application. 

Applications are due by end of day Monday, December 8, 2025.

### FY26 SCINet/AI-COE Postdoctoral Fellowships call for proposals

SCINet and the ARS AI-COE are again offering postdoctoral fellowship funding to ARS scientists who wish to mentor SCINet/AI-COE fellows working in their labs. These fellowships provide an exciting opportunity for participants to advance agricultural research by developing and applying new and emerging scientific computing technologies, including big data analytics, artificial intelligence, and machine learning. Fellows will be able to conduct research in collaboration with ARS scientists, use SCINet’s high-performance computing clusters and other computational resources, and access the numerous training opportunities available through SCINet and the AI-COE. 

For information and to submit a proposal, please visit the [proposal application page](/opportunities/fellowship-mentors). 

The deadline for applications is COB on Friday, February 6, 2026.

### FY26 AI Innovation Fund Awards call for proposals

The ARS AI-COE is again sponsoring AI Innovation Fund awards to support research projects that apply AI and machine learning (ML) methods to agricultural research or that develop new software tools or data products that use AI or ML techniques. We expect to fund 4 to 6 projects of up to $100,000 each. Funds will need to be spent this fiscal year, so projects should have a short budget timeline or involve partnerships that can be funded through collaborative agreements. 

Please visit the [AI Innovation Fund page](/opportunities/ai-innovation/) for more information and for application instructions. 

The deadline for applications is COB on Friday, February 6, 2026.

### More flexible GPU limits

It has been exciting to see the many innovative ways that ARS researchers are using SCINet’s graphics processing units (GPUs), and as GPU use has expanded, we’ve been working to ensure that the GPU limits in Slurm satisfy as many use cases as possible. We’ve recently heard feedback from users that more flexibility in allocating GPU resources, including being able to request more GPUs or longer time limits, would be helpful. Over the last few months, we’ve implemented two key changes to help accommodate these needs.

First, it is now possible to request as many as 24 of the NVIDIA L40S GPUs at once (the previous limit was 12). For compute-intensive jobs that can leverage multiple GPUs, this should offer a substantial increase in throughput.

Second, it is now possible to request time limits as long as 7 days for the NVIDIA A100 GPUs. To help preserve resource sharing, we’ve implemented this change so that longer time limits are constrained to have fewer GPUs and CPUs (and vice versa). Specifically, resource limits on the A100 partition (“gpu-a100”) are as follows:

{% include table content="| Requested time limit (days) | Maximum GPU count | Maximum CPU count |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 or less | 12 | 192 |
| 2 | 6 | 96 |
| 3 | 4 | 64 |
| 4 | 3 | 48 |
| 5 | 2 | 38 |
| 6 | 2 | 32 |
| 7 | 1 | 27 |" %}

In all cases, no more than 1.5 TB of memory can be requested for a job on the gpu-a100 partition. Previously, the maximum time limit for any GPU job was 2 days. If this approach works well, we may expand it to other GPU partitions in the future. (For an overview of GPU resources on SCINet, please see the [user tip](#scinet-user-tip), below!)

### GPU survey: Help guide GPU upgrades in FY2026!

Demand for graphics processing units on SCINet has grown dramatically in the past few years. To stay ahead of this trend and be prepared for future demand, we are planning our next round of GPU upgrades, and we would value your input to help guide our decision making! 

If you would like to contribute, please complete our brief [GPU needs survey](https://forms.office.com/g/fESGiwSY36) by COB on Friday, December 12.


### Using Globus to share data with external collaborators

Do you have large files on SCINet systems that you would like to share with external collaborators who don't have SCINet accounts? You will soon be able to do this by using Globus, the same web-based interface recommended for other data transfers to, from, and among SCINet systems! 

We will be hosting a webinar Friday, January 23, 2026, 3-4 PM ET to give an overview of what kinds of sharing are supported and a demonstration of how to request and set up file sharing. 

[Register using this form](https://forms.cloud.microsoft/g/k5tgtu2mEr) to receive updates and the call-in information.

### Resuming automatic 90-day temporary file deletion

Both of SCINet’s supercomputers (Ceres and Atlas) provide temporary storage space at /90daydata, and files in /90daydata are usually automatically deleted after 90 days of inactivity (please see our [Storage Guide](/guides/data/storage#large-short-term-storage) for more information). During the lapse in government funding, automatic deletion of temporary files was disabled.

Please note that we plan to resume automatic temporary file deletion on January 2, 2026. If you have any files in /90daydata that will be older than 90 days on January 2 which you intend to keep, please move them to another storage location before that date.

### DTU Health Tech applications supported on SCINet clusters

Applications developed and published by [DTU Health Tech](https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/software.php) are now supported on SCINet clusters. Since the applications require users to accept terms of use, SCINet users first need to [submit a short form](https://forms.office.com/g/NWhND71BDG) to accept the terms and request access to the software. Currently, the DTU Health Tech application installed is SignalP – 6.0h. If there are other applications from DTU Health Tech you wish to have available on SCINet clusters, please fill out this [software request form](https://scinet.usda.gov/support/request#software-request). 

## SCINet Working Groups

SCINet working groups (WGs) support ARS researchers and their collaborators in using scientific computing methods and SCINet computational resources in their research. Common WG activities include hosting recurring virtual meetings and webinars, organizing training events, and participating in collaborative research or software development projects.  

Current Working Groups

* [Ag100Pest Initiative (subgroup of AGR)](https://scinet.usda.gov/research/working-groups/ag100pest)
* [Animal Behaviour AI Working Group](https://scinet.usda.gov/research/working-groups/behavior)
* [Arthropod Genomics Research (AGR) Working Group](https://scinet.usda.gov/research/working-groups/arthropods)
* [Breeding AI and ML Working Group](https://scinet.usda.gov/research/working-groups/breeding)
* [Geospatial Research Working Group](https://scinet.usda.gov/research/working-groups/geospatial)
* [Microbiome Working Group](https://scinet.usda.gov/research/working-groups/microbiome)
* [SCINet-Longterm Agroecosystem Research (LTAR) Phenology Working Group](https://scinet.usda.gov/research/working-groups/LTARphenology)
* [Protein Function and Phenotype Prediction Working Group](https://scinet.usda.gov/research/working-groups/proteinfunction)
* [Translational Omics Working Group](https://scinet.usda.gov/research/working-groups/omics) 

If you are interested in creating a working group, please compile the following: 

* The working group’s name 
* A description of the working group including its purpose and goals 
* Contact information for people to reach out to if they want to learn more about or join the working group. 

Send this information to the SCINet office at [ARS-SCINet-Office@usda.gov](mailto:ARS-SCINet-Office@usda.gov). 

## Training

### Training workshops

#### RNA-seq analysis with Galaxy  

Rescheduled to January 26 & 28, 2026, 1-5 PM ET

Leads: Genome Informatics Facility at Iowa State University and SCINet Office

In this workshop participants will work through a complete RNA-seq analysis using Galaxy. Participants will learn how to create workflows in Galaxy to:
*  Upload and process RNA-seq data
*  Perform quality control, alignment and expression quantification
*  Identify differentially expressed genes using DESeq2

We will also explore ways in which you can share your history and workflows with others in Galaxy and how it can be a powerful tool for collaborations.

At this time, registration is closed as we have reached maximum capacity for the workshop. However, you may [complete the registration form](https://forms.office.com/g/HT6C9ad6CL) to be added to our waitlist for future offerings.

#### Carpentries: Unix, Git, and Python 

Rescheduled to February 3 & 5; February 11 & 13, 2026, 1-5 PM ET 

Leads: Keo Corak (ARS Computational Biologist), Amisha Poret-Peterson (ARS Research Microbiologist), and Steven Schroeder (ARS Computational Biologist)

The SCINet Office, in collaboration with ARS’s certified Carpentries instructors, is offering a Carpentries workshop that will teach participants the Unix command line, version control with Git, and Python programming. The workshop will span two weeks: 
*  **Unix command line and version control with Git**: Feb 3 & 5, 2026, 1-5 PM ET
*  **Programming with Python**: Feb 11 & 13, 2026, 1-5 PM ET

This workshop will provide an interactive, hands-on experience that will help you learn valuable skills for data management and analysis. 

At this time, registration is closed as we have reached maximum capacity for all workshops. However, you may [complete the registration form](https://forms.office.com/g/viLFLk2sch) to be added to our waitlist for future offerings.

#### Using large language models (LLMs) on SCINet's supercomputers

February 18 & 20, 2026, 1-4 PM ET

Leads: SCINet Office

Large language models (LLMs), a key technology behind well-known tools like ChatGPT and Microsoft Copilot, have a multitude of applications in agricultural research. SCINet’s high-performance computing resources provide an excellent environment for research use of LLMs, and this workshop will equip you with the knowledge and tools you need to take advantage of LLM capabilities in your research.  

We will explore a variety of use cases, from basic “chat” interactions to more advanced applications, including information retrieval and summarization and high-throughput automation. Along the way, we will learn about how LLMs and related technologies actually work, which will help you make well-informed decisions about how to best use them for your research.  

Ultimately, this workshop will put *you* in the driver's seat: you will be able to decide which models are most appropriate and how to use them, all while ensuring that you remain in full control of your data and results and in compliance with research security requirements. 

[To register, please fill out this registration form](https://forms.office.com/g/jPtZkCEYjR).


#### Transfer learning 

February 24 & 26, 2026, 1-5 PM ET 

Leads: Research Computing team at the University of Florida 

This workshop provides the foundational concepts and practical applications of transfer learning, a powerful technique in deep learning that allows AI models to leverage pre-trained knowledge to improve performance on new tasks. The sessions will cover different types of transfer learning techniques, such as feature extraction and fine-tuning. This includes hands-on experience in applying these techniques to computer vision and language models.
 
[To register, please fill out this registration form](https://forms.office.com/g/A9Dc5YXPXD).

#### The Carpentries instructor training

SCINet is collaborating with [The Carpentries](https://carpentries.org/) to offer The Carpentries’ Instructor Training Course for ARS scientists. In this course, you will learn about evidence-based practices for effective and inclusive teaching, with a particular focus on teaching computational skills. There is no fee charged to course participants, but seats are limited. 

[If you are interested in becoming a Carpentries-certified instructor, please complete this form](https://forms.office.com/g/4uF8zfQBNh).

### Coursera
{% include layout/newsletter/subsection section="/training/2025_coursera" %}


### Workshop Reports 
#### Practicum AI workshop series

Leads: Research Computing team at the University of Florida

The Practicum AI series offered in collaboration with the Research Computing team at the University of Florida is a hands-on, applied artificial intelligence curriculum intended for learners with limited coding and math background. This series consisted of 3 workshops (for a detailed summary, please click on the workshops of interest): 
*  [Computing for AI](/events/practicum-ai/computing): August 19, 2025, 2-5 PM ET
*  [Python for AI](/events/practicum-ai/python): August 27 & 28, 2025, 2-5 PM ET
*  [Deep Learning Foundations](https://scinet.usda.gov/events/practicum-ai/deep-learning): September 3 & 4, 2025, 2-5 PM ET

In these workshops, participants gained hands-on experiences in basic computing skills for AI/ML, neural networks, deep learning for image tasks and image classification and Natural Language Processing using pre-trained models. 
We will also be offering an intermediate course in the Practicum AI series, Transfer learning, in February. [To register, please complete this form](https://forms.office.com/g/A9Dc5YXPXD).


{% include layout/newsletter/subsection section="/training/2025_improve" %}

## Support

{% include layout/newsletter/subsection section="/support/2025_getting_started" %}

{% include layout/newsletter/subsection section="/support/2025_support_email" %}

### SCINet User Tip
**GPU resources available on SCINet**
{:.subheader}

Graphics processing units (GPUs) are increasingly essential for a wide range of scientific computing tasks, including many deep learning applications. SCINet currently provides a variety of GPUs on the Atlas supercomputer (Ceres does not have GPUs). These GPUs are available to all SCINet users, so whether you are experienced with GPU computing or just getting started, we encourage you to try them out! The following table summarizes all GPU resources currently available on Atlas.

{% include table content="| GPU type | GPU memory | Slurm partition | Number of GPUs available |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| NVIDIA V100 | 32 GB | gpu-v100 | 8 |
| NVIDIA A100 | 80 GB | gpu-a100 | 24 |
| NVIDIA A100, multi-instance | 10 GB | gpu-a100-mig7 | 112 |
| NVIDIA L40S | 48 GB | gpu-l40s | 48 |" %}

To use any of these GPUs, you will need to request the appropriate resources from Slurm, including enough CPUs and “regular” memory to support your GPU application. You will also need to specify the appropriate participation and indicate that you want to use at least one GPU using Slurm’s <code>--gres</code> argument. For example, Slurm sbatch arguments to request one L40S GPU, 16 CPUs, and 32 GB of memory would look like this:

```
#SBATCH --partition=gpu-l40s
#SBATCH --gres=gpu:1
#SBATCH --ntasks=16
#SBATCH --memory=32GB
```

Please note that unless the software you are using is specifically designed to use more than one GPU, we recommend only requesting one GPU at a time. In many cases, requesting multiple GPUs will not result in faster performance and will merely take resources from other SCINet users. For more information, please see [Atlas’s documentation](https://www.hpc.msstate.edu/computing/atlas/).

**Do you have tips to share? Email them to [ARS-SCINet-Office@usda.gov](mailto:ARS-SCINet-Office@usda.gov) to be included in future newsletters.**

### SCINet Corner

SCINet Corner is a VRSC-moderated virtual space for people to share knowledge, discuss best practices, learn about new opportunities, and explore resources to support progress on their projects.   
 
The next SCINet Corner will be held on January 22, 2026, from 1-2 PM ET. January’s event will give an overview of SCINet and the computing and training resources we offer.

[You can register for this and future SCINet Corners here.](https://forms.office.com/g/tgh4SxRqit)


{% include layout/newsletter/subsection section="/support/2025_question" %}


## Connect

{% include layout/newsletter/subsection section="/connect/2025_connect" %}